Rewrite `Steps to Generate Ratings` with `otr-replay` and improved manual steps (#128)
osu-tournament-rating/otr-docs: docs/Steps to Generate Ratings.md

> This guide explains how to regenerate player ratings from publicly-available datasets as they were at the time of the snapshot. This enables independent verification of tournaments which use the platform for filtering and/or seeding. The [`otr-replay`](https://github.com/osu-tournament-rating/otr-replay) tool performs the entire procedure automatically, however, the equivalent manual process is also documented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to regenerate player ratings from publicly available datasets as they were at the time of the snapshot. This enables independent verification of tournaments which use the platform for filtering and/or seeding. The [`otr-replay`](https://github.com/osu-tournament-rating/otr-replay) tool performs the entire procedure automatically; however, the equivalent manual process is also documented.
```

> Throughout this guide, the **"effective date"** is the point in time that ratings are generated for. This is usually the moment a tournament closed registrations, or another date the tournament announced for capturing ratings of registrants. All dates and times are in UTC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughout this guide, the **"effective date"** is the point in time that ratings are generated for. This is usually the moment a tournament closes registrations, or another date the tournament announces for capturing ratings of registrants. All dates and times are in UTC.
```

Ratings are reproduced exactly as they were at the instant the database snapshot was created. `otr-replay` automatically selects the newest public snapshot available at or before the effective date, so every effective date covered by the same snapshot produces identical output.

## Using otr-replay

`otr-replay` requires [Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) and [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/).

1. Clone the [otr-replay](https://github.com/osu-tournament-rating/otr-replay) repository: `git clone https://github.com/osu-tournament-rating/otr-replay.git`.

> 2. From the repository root, run the program with the effective date as a timestamp. Replace the example date in the command below with the effective date. Timestamps use the format `YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM[:SS]` and are always interpreted as UTC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the repository root, run the program with the effective date as a timestamp. Replace the example date in the command below with the effective date. Timestamps use the format `YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM[:SS]` and are always interpreted in UTC.
```

```bash
cd otr-replay
uv run otr-replay --as-of 2026-06-27T23:59
```

The program downloads the correct public replica from the [public replicas site](https://data.otr.stagec.net), verifies its checksum, imports it into a temporary database, runs the correct [[Development/Platform Architecture#processor|processor]] release, reconciles decay, and writes two files: a CSV with the columns `osu_id`, `username`, `ruleset`, `rating`, and `volatility`, and a metadata file describing the run.

> [!note]

> > The first public replica is dated `2025-10-06`, and `2025.10.01` is the first supported processor release for this process. A release is only supported when a corresponding public replica is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The first public replica is dated `2025-10-06`, and `2025.10.01` is the earliest supported processor release for this process. A release is only supported when a corresponding public replica is available.
```

> To verify a tournament's use of o!TR, compare the export against the tournament's data. Ideally, this is supplied in CSV form with at least the `osu_id` and `rating` properties present for each registrant.

Reviewer: Probably worth linking https://otr.stagec.net/tools/filter-reports and clarifying that values there are rounded? / truncated? to two decimal places.

Author: Going to update the CSV download to not round values. Will add a note about the tool.

### The metadata file

> Every run writes a `.metadata.json` file beside the CSV. It describes the exact inputs the ratings were produced from along with the reconciliation that was applied and a SHA-256 digest of the CSV itself. Keep and share the two files together; the metadata is what makes a CSV traceable back to its inputs. To confirm a CSV matches its metadata, compare the file's SHA-256 digest against the recorded one. Two runs are directly comparable through their metadata files alone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every run writes a `.metadata.json` file beside the CSV. It describes the exact inputs the ratings were produced from, along with the [[#Decay Reconciliation|decay reconcilation]] that was applied and a SHA-256 digest of the CSV itself. Keep and share the two files together; the metadata is what makes a CSV traceable back to its inputs. 

To confirm that a CSV matches its metadata, compare the file's SHA-256 digest against the recorded one. Two runs are directly comparable through their metadata files alone.
```

## Decay Reconciliation

The processor applies a final [[Rating Framework/Rating Calculation/Rating Decay|decay]] pass up to the system's current time and is therefore not aware that it is being run against an older dataset. Replaying an old snapshot therefore incorrectly creates decay adjustments that did not exist at that time and must be reconciled.

The `otr-replay` tool automatically corrects this using the following process:

1. It verifies that only decay adjustments exist after the snapshot was created.

> 1. It deletes those adjustments and restores the exact rating and volatility values they recorded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It deletes those adjustments and restores the exact rating and volatility values recorded without them.
```

1. It refuses to write any output if anything other than decay follows the snapshot.

This process is required to restore ratings to their state at the time of the snapshot.

### Example

> In this example, the processor release is `2026.05.18`, the database snapshot is for `2026-06-03_23_20_30.gz`, the effective date is `2026-06-05T12:00:00`, and the system date is `2026-08-06`. Without reconciliation, `im a fancy lad`'s decay is generated through the Wednesday prior to the present day (`2026-08-05`), as shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the processor release is `2026.05.18`, the database snapshot is for `2026-06-03_23_20_30.gz`, the effective date is `2026-06-05T12:00:00`, and the system date is `2026-08-06`. Without reconciliation, `im a fancy lad`'s rating history includes decay generated until the present day (the final update being on `2026-08-05`), as shown below.
```
Actually I think you should use a different example... this was an outlier snapshot which was generated on a Wednesday ~23 UTC instead of the usual Tuesday ~11:45 UTC, which could cause some confusion with how timelines match up versus rating recalculation.

Author: Updated

![[fancylad-rating-history-table-2.png]]

> ![[fancylad-rating-history-table.png]]

Reviewer: Not sure if you wanted to show more recent rating updates, but this screenshot doesn't currently show the decay from June to August.

Author: Removing that image

> With reconciliation, however, the decay now stops at `2026-06-03` - the Wednesday at 12:00 UTC immediately prior to the snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With reconciliation, however, the final decay update occurs on `2026-06-03`, the Wednesday at 12:00 UTC immediately prior to the snapshot.
```

### Start the database

Create a network and a standalone PostgreSQL container:

```bash
docker network create otr-replay-net
docker run -d --name otr-db --network otr-replay-net \
  -e POSTGRES_USER=postgres -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password -e POSTGRES_DB=postgres \
  postgres:17
```

Before importing, repeat the following command until it reports that the server is accepting connections:

```bash
docker exec otr-db pg_isready -h 127.0.0.1 -U postgres
```

### Import a database replica

Public database replicas are published on the [public replicas site](https://data.otr.stagec.net).

Download the most recent replica dated at or before the effective date, along with its `.sha256` checksum file, and verify the download:

```bash
# Note: Both the replica .gz and the
# .sha256 file must be in the same directory
sha256sum -c /path/to/replica.gz.sha256
```

Then import the replica:

```bash
gunzip -c /path/to/replica.gz | docker exec -i otr-db psql -U postgres -d postgres
```

> [!tip]
> `ERROR: role [...] does not exist` messages are expected and can be safely ignored. Any other error means the import failed.

### Run the processor

> Browse the [releases page](https://github.com/osu-tournament-rating/otr-processor/releases) to find the most recent release available at the effective date. Docker image tags match release versions, so take the name of the release and replace the `YYYY.MM.DD` text below with that value.

Reviewer: Small annoying detail. Suppose the most recent release was on Thursday 2026-08-06, and the effective date is Saturday 2026-08-08. Since the processor hasn't recalculated ratings since Tuesday 2026-08-04, the user should instead take the most recent release before that, right? (And how can people tell if the dates are the same?)

Author: Yeah, that's correct. That is quite annoying. I guess the rule is always "the most recent release available *at the time of the replica being used for the effective date*". So if they're on the same day, the replica is the reference point and the processer's release time will determine whether it can be used.

>[!example]
> For `otr-public-replica_2026-08-04_11_45_01.gz`, use `2026-08-04 11:45:01+00`.

```bash
printf '%s' '
BEGIN;
DO $guard$
BEGIN
  IF EXISTS (
    SELECT FROM rating_adjustments
    WHERE timestamp > $ts$YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS+00$ts$
      AND (adjustment_type NOT IN (1, 3) OR match_id IS NOT NULL)
  ) THEN
    RAISE EXCEPTION $msg$adjustments after the snapshot are not decay; cannot reconcile$msg$;
  END IF;
END $guard$;
WITH earliest AS (
    SELECT DISTINCT ON (player_id, ruleset)
        player_id, ruleset, rating_before, volatility_before
    FROM rating_adjustments
    WHERE timestamp > $ts$YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS+00$ts$
      AND adjustment_type IN (1, 3)
    ORDER BY player_id, ruleset, timestamp, id
)
UPDATE player_ratings pr
SET rating = earliest.rating_before,
    volatility = earliest.volatility_before
FROM earliest
WHERE pr.player_id = earliest.player_id
  AND pr.ruleset = earliest.ruleset;
DELETE FROM rating_adjustments
WHERE timestamp > $ts$YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS+00$ts$
  AND adjustment_type IN (1, 3);
COMMIT;
' | docker exec -i otr-db psql -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -U postgres -d postgres
```

> [!tip]

> > Adjustment types `1` and `3` are rating decay and volatility decay respectively. Decay adjustments dated after the replica was created are a product of the replay and can be safely removed. The first block refuses to reconcile if anything other than decay follows the snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Adjustment types `1` and `3` are rating decay and volatility decay respectively. Decay adjustments dated after the replica was created are a product of the replay and should be removed. The first block refuses to reconcile if anything other than decay follows the snapshot.
```

### Export player ratings

Export player ratings for verification. Rulesets are mapped as follows:

- 0=osu!
- 1=osu!taiko
- 2=osu!catch
- 3=osu!mania (Other) (No ratings are generated for this ruleset)
- 4=osu!mania 4K

> - 5=osu!mania 7K

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `0` = osu!
- `1` = osu!taiko
- `2` = osu!catch
- `3` = osu!mania (Other) (No ratings are generated for this ruleset)
- `4` = osu!mania 4K
- `5` = osu!mania 7K
```

1. From the repository root, run the program with the effective date as a timestamp. Replace the example date in the command below with the effective date. Timestamps use the format `YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM[:SS][Z]` and are always interpreted as UTC, so a replica timestamp such as `2026-08-08T00:06:13Z` can be pasted as-is.

```bash
cd otr-replay
uv run otr-replay --as-of 2026-06-27T23:59
```

The program downloads the correct public replica from the [public replicas site](https://data.otr.stagec.net), verifies its checksum, imports it into a temporary database, runs the correct [[Development/Platform Architecture#processor|processor]] release, reconciles decay, and writes two files: a CSV with the columns `osu_id`, `username`, `ruleset`, `rating`, and `volatility`, and a metadata file describing the run.

The replica is stored in the system's default temp directory and is discarded when the process finishes, even if it fails.

> [!note]
> The first public replica is dated `2025-10-06T21:13:57Z`, and `2025.10.01` is the earliest supported processor release for this process.

> Tournament hosts who filter registrants with the [filtering tool](https://otr.stagec.net/tools/filter) are instructed to list the filter report ID on the tournament's forum post, so a report should be available. Use the [filter report lookup tool](https://otr.stagec.net/tools/filter-reports) to search for the report ID and download the CSV file. If one is not provided. If not, compare the export against the tournament's publicly-available rating data. Ideally, this is supplied in CSV form with at least the `osu_id` and `rating` properties present for each registrant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tournament hosts who filter registrants with the [filtering tool](https://otr.stagec.net/tools/filter) are instructed to list the filter report ID on the tournament's forum post, so a report should be available. Use the [filter report lookup tool](https://otr.stagec.net/tools/filter-reports) to search for the report ID and download the CSV file. 

If the forum post does not provide a report ID, compare the export against the tournament's publicly available rating data. Ideally, this is supplied in CSV form with at least the `osu_id` and `rating` properties present for each registrant.
```

Author: good catch thanks!

>[!example]
> For `otr-public-replica_2026-08-08T00:06:13Z.gz`, use `2026-08-08 00:06:13+00`.

```bash
printf '%s' '
BEGIN;
DO $guard$
BEGIN
  IF EXISTS (
    SELECT FROM rating_adjustments
    WHERE timestamp > $ts$YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS+00$ts$
      AND (adjustment_type NOT IN (1, 3) OR match_id IS NOT NULL)
  ) THEN
    RAISE EXCEPTION $msg$adjustments after the snapshot are not decay; cannot reconcile$msg$;
  END IF;
END $guard$;
WITH earliest AS (
    SELECT DISTINCT ON (player_id, ruleset)
        player_id, ruleset, rating_before, volatility_before
    FROM rating_adjustments
    WHERE timestamp > $ts$YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS+00$ts$
      AND adjustment_type IN (1, 3)
    ORDER BY player_id, ruleset, timestamp, id
)
UPDATE player_ratings pr
SET rating = earliest.rating_before,
    volatility = earliest.volatility_before
FROM earliest
WHERE pr.player_id = earliest.player_id
  AND pr.ruleset = earliest.ruleset;
DELETE FROM rating_adjustments
WHERE timestamp > $ts$YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS+00$ts$
  AND adjustment_type IN (1, 3);
COMMIT;
' | docker exec -i otr-db psql -v ON_ERROR_STOP=1 -U postgres -d postgres
```

> [!tip]

> > Adjustment types `1` and `3` are rating decay and volatility decay respectively. Decay adjustments dated after the replica was created are a product of the replay and should be removed. The first block refuses to reconcile if anything other than decay follows the snapshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Adjustment types `1` and `3` are rating decay and volatility decay respectively. Decay adjustments dated after the replica was created are a product of the replay and should be removed. The first code block above refuses to reconcile if anything other than decay follows the snapshot.
```
